🚀 Kubernetes can run containers, but who decides what should run first, what should run next, and what should happen when something fails?
That orchestration layer is where Argo Workflows shines.
Think of it as the engine that coordinates containerized tasks across Kubernetes, ensuring the right workload runs at the right time, with the right dependencies and retry logic.
Recently, I spent some time learning Argo Workflows. Here are my key takeaways 👇
What is Argo Workflows?
Argo Workflows is an open-source, container-native workflow engine for Kubernetes. It enables you to define, orchestrate, and execute multi-step workflows where each step runs as its own containerized task.
What does "Container-Native" mean?
A container-native workflow engine is designed specifically for containers and Kubernetes.
✅ Every task runs inside its own container
✅ Each workflow step is executed as a Kubernetes pod
✅ Argo automatically starts, monitors, and manages the execution of each step
✅ Kubernetes handles scheduling and scaling behind the scenes
What is a Workflow Engine?
A workflow engine manages a sequence of tasks by determining:
•	What should run
•	In what order it should run
•	Which tasks depend on others
•	How failures and retries should be handled
How Argo Works
1️⃣ Define a workflow in YAML as a Kubernetes Custom Resource (CRD)
2️⃣ Create Templates that describe the tasks to execute
3️⃣ Specify an Entrypoint that determines where execution begins
4️⃣ Argo launches each task as a Kubernetes pod
5️⃣ Argo tracks execution status and manages dependencies, retries, and outcomes
Key Concepts
🔹 Workflow
The central object in Argo.
A Workflow:
•	Describes the work to be executed
•	Tracks the execution state of the workflow
Unlike a static configuration, a Workflow is also a live instance that maintains the status of each step throughout execution.
🔹 Templates
Think of Templates as functions in a programming language.
A template can:
•	Run a container
•	Execute a script
•	Process data
•	Invoke other templates
🔹 Entrypoint
Think of the Entrypoint as the Main() method in a C# application.
It tells Argo:
"Start executing the workflow from this template."
Practical Example
Let's say we have a simple workflow that prints "hello world".
YAML
apiVersion: argoproj.io/v1alpha1
kind: Workflow
metadata:
  generateName: hello-world-
spec:
entrypoint: hello-world 
templates:
- name: hello-world
container:
  image: busybox
  command: [echo]
  args: ["hello world"]
What's happening here?
🔹 Workflow: Defines the overall process
🔹 Entrypoint: hello-world is the first template Argo will execute
🔹 Template: Contains the instructions for the task
🔹 Container: Argo creates a Kubernetes pod using the busybox image
🔹 Command: Executes echo "hello world"
